You are listening to a message from First Baptist Church, Wichita Falls.
For more information about First Baptist, click the link in the show notes or go to fbcwf.org.
Today's message comes from Senior Pastor Dr. Bob McCartney.
Some people always at the beginning of the year look and say, you know what?
I want to make some changes.
in my life.
I want to do some things differently.
Maybe I want to make financial changes or maybe this morning you came to church and welcome.
We're really glad you're here.
Not going to kind of poke you or make fun of you for being here.
I want you to know how thankful I am.
You decided to come to First Baptist Church this morning.
If you said, you know what?
I'm going to start the new year off in church.
We're going to get this going this year.
Hey, welcome.
We're so glad that you came this morning.
And some people make spiritual commitments, but the one commitment that is made by a huge number of people is always something about health.
As a matter of fact, a recent survey said 47% of people say on January 1st, you know what?
I'm gonna lose weight this year.
I'm gonna get in better shape.
I'm gonna get back into those genes that I wore in high school.
I'm gonna do all those things.
And I'm gonna look better.
I'm gonna feel better.
And about February, all that is falling apart.
About Valentine's Day, you know, you're eating cupcakes and conversation hearts.
And so there is just this weight that sometimes we can't lose.
But this morning I wanna talk to you about some weight
that you can throw off.
There is a weight that this morning you can leave behind in 2025.
You can start this year lighter in your spirit.
And it's the weight of guilt and shame and regret.
It is the weight that our sin brings into our lives, the things we wish we could undo, the choices we wish we had not made, the shame that we walk with,
you don't have to carry that into 2026.
And this morning, I want to share with you how you can throw off that weight, whether you're at our Shepherd campus, our West campus, 11 o'clock East.
I want you to know that this morning you can walk in freedom and forgiveness.
So what I want us to do is look at Colossians chapter two,
In Colossians chapter two, there is some powerful language that Paul uses in which Christ is going to deal with our sin.
It's not a way to do better.
It's not a way to try harder.
It is a way to experience the grace of God in forgiveness.
Look at Colossians chapter two, verse 13.
And when you were dead in your wrongdoings and in the uncircumcision of your flesh,
He made you alive together with Him, having forgiven us all our wrongdoings, having canceled the certificate of debt consisting of decrees against us, which was hostile to us.
And He has taken it out of the way, having nailed it to the cross.
When He had disarmed the rulers and authorities, He made a public display of them, having triumphed over them through Him.
This morning I want us to walk through that passage and I believe there is something in this that is really going to give you a refreshing 2026.
First of all, let's kind of deal with the bad news.
There is a weight you can't lose.
There's a weight you can't lose on your own.
He says to us that when we were dead, when we were dead in our trespasses or dead in our wrongdoing, in our sin,
Paul uses that word in order to confront us with the reality that we can do nothing that changes our lives spiritually.
We can do nothing that changes us really with a lasting kind of change.
When you're dead, you can do nothing.
Only by God's grace can we experience what He desires for us.
To be dead means this.
It means that we're not struggling.
We're not misguided.
We're not misinformed.
The truth is no self-improvement program can fix us.
You can't download the app that is going to fix this.
You can't go to a bookstore and there's still a few of those around and buy a self-help book and fix this.
No self-improvement program will fix it.
No moral effort will erase it.
We have this idea sometimes that, you know, I've done some things that are wrong.
I feel guilty for those things.
So I need to do some good things to make up for them.
The problem is this, you can never do enough good things to make up for the wrong things.
It just doesn't work that way.
It will not work that way in your conscience.
It will not work that way in your spirit.
It won't work that way with God.
Not only that, but no religious activity can offset it.
Now look, thankfully you came to church this morning.
But you need to understand that what we do when we express ourselves in religious activity, when we sing, when we worship, when we take the Lord's Supper, when we are baptized, those are memorials of what Christ has done in our life.
They are ways for us to express our gratitude for what He has done.
They are not ways for us to earn God's forgiveness.
And a lot of people really have a misunderstanding that somehow religious activities, though they are good and they undergird our face sometimes and they give us something to kind of tangibly think through and they're really good things, they don't actually take away the guilt, the shame and the sin that we're experiencing.
When we do baptisms, and not poking fun at anybody, but when we do baptisms we have people do testimonies.
And one of the reasons we do those is
because sometimes people misunderstand baptism.
Now look, that's not anything to, we don't laugh at them about that.
We wanna help them.
We wanna help them understand what baptism's really all about.
And one of the things that we experience sometimes is that people will write in their testimony, I wanna get baptized to wash all my sins away.
Our water isn't that strong.
It'll get you wet.
But it will not wash your sins away.
Baptism doesn't do that.
Let me help you with something.
Baptism is the public testimony that your sins have been washed away by the blood of Jesus.
So no self-improvement program is going to fix it.
No moral action is going to erase it.
No religious activity can offset it.
And no sorrow or remorse can undo it.
Now repentance is a necessary part of receiving God's forgiveness.
But just feeling really bad, just being sorry doesn't undo what I've done.
We need to be clear on that.
My hobby, you know, I ride a bike a lot.
So I read stories about riding a bike.
You know, it's an amazing thing that stuff just pops up in your feed.
I don't know how that is.
The other day I was talking to my daughter,
And we were just talking about, you know, do you have any regrets?
I say, I have a regret.
I wish I'd learned to play the guitar.
And now in my Facebook feed, there is one guitar lesson after, I don't, I just said it one time.
They're listening to us.
But there was this tragic story in my Facebook feed of this past year.
There's a world champion cyclist.
His name's Rohan Dennis.
He's Australian, won the world championship, I think three times.
And his wife is also a celebrated cyclist.
She represented Australia and the Olympics twice.
Her name's Melissa Hoskins.
They were at their house and they're remodeling their kitchen.
And they had an argument, a pretty heated argument about remodeling the kitchen.
And
He stormed out of the house, got in his car, turned it on, slammed it in gear, stomped on the pedal to back it out of the driveway.
And he did not know she had followed him out of the house.
He backed over her and killed her.
He was put on trial.
He was convicted of negligent homicide.
The judge suspended the sentence because he said, your punishment of losing your wife and what you have to live with is enough.
And Rohan Dennis wrote this letter.
that he read and it was to her and it was a bitter grieving apology over what he had done and you could tell that he was deeply sorry.
I mean it was real for what he had done, what he had done not only to her but to their children and this was a grieving man so filled with remorse
and yet it does not undo what he did.
The deepest of our sorrow cannot undo our sin because we are dead in trespasses and sins.
And not only that, but there's another little piece of bad news here.
There is a written record of what I've done.
That's what Paul says.
He talks about the
certificate of debt, the certificate of debt that we are indebted to God because of our actions, our sin creates a debt to God.
Now what's written on this certificate of debt?
Well in the book of Psalms, David wrote a particular Psalm in which there's one verse that uses three words that are really important.
Let me show it to you.
Psalm 32 verse 5.
David says,
Then I acknowledged my sin to you.
That's the first word, my sin to you.
And did not conceal my iniquity.
That's the second word.
And said, I will confess my transgressions.
That's the third word to the Lord.
Let me talk about those three words for just a few minutes.
And I believe that's what's written on Bob's certificate of debt, okay?
My sin.
The word there is a word that simply means to miss the mark.
In the New Testament, there's this beautiful word picture and it's the word ha-martia in the Greek New Testament.
And it's a word for an archer who's aiming at a target and he fires the arrow and he wants to hit the target.
He's trying to hit the target, but he misses.
And the fact is that sometimes we sin and we're not just trying to rebel against God and do the wrong thing.
We just don't do the right thing.
We're trying to do the right thing, but there's something in us that leads us to do the wrong thing.
We just missed the mark.
That's written on the certificate of debt.
But then he uses the second word, iniquity.
Now the word iniquity is a little different.
It's still sin, and if we use that as a broad category, but the word iniquity speaks of my bent.
Now here's the truth.
Every single one of us has what
the Bible would refer to as a besetting sin.
In other words, there is something that you are just drawn to, that you know is wrong.
You know it's not good for you.
You know it's not productive.
It's not helpful.
And you know it's sin.
And you don't want to go there.
You don't want to do that.
But there is something that just it's in us.
It's in our nature.
We are bent toward that.
It is our sin nature.
And even after you're saved, you receive a new nature, but you have a flesh and that flesh is bent toward that particular sin.
All of us have something.
It's almost like it has some sort of tractor beam and it pulls on us and it wants to draw us in.
And there are times when just like the apostle Paul says that which I want to do,
I can't do and that which I don't want to do, I find myself doing.
That's iniquity.
Then he uses that third word, transgressions.
The old translations of the Bible use the word trespass there.
I like that word actually.
I think it helps me to understand more of what it is.
Some of you are hunters.
I'm not, not opposed to it.
I am a gun owner, but I'm not a hunter.
But I have hunted before and I know this.
If I were hunting with my dad and we used to hunt quail on our farmland.
And of course there was adjacent farmland to us that we didn't own.
And if we got to a fence and there was a sign on it that said, no trespassing.
I knew what that meant.
I knew that it is a violation to step across that fence.
I shouldn't go over there and hunt.
But if we thought the birds were over there and we said, we know what we're going to go over there anyway.
That is willful rebellion.
Now look, we all have to be honest and say this.
There are times in our lives when we knew the right thing to do, we knew the wrong thing to do, and we did the wrong thing anyway.
We rebelled against God.
Whether it was me trying to do the right thing and I just missed the target,
whether it is in my nature that I am bent towards something that I know is not right for me, it's not helpful for me, it's not good for me, and it's not pleasing to God, and I go that way because I'm sort of bent toward that, or I just rebel against God.
That's what's written on the certificate of debt.
My indebtedness to God is my sin debt.
And it's not rumor, it's not gossip, it's not hearsay, it's fact.
I did it.
And I can't do anything to make it go away.
Now I can pretend that it doesn't exist.
I can try to delete it, but it's there.
A few years ago, James Gunn, who is a really notable Hollywood producer, was hired to produce the Guardians of the Galaxy film series for Disney.
And some people dug up some old tweets and old posts from social media where he had made some really offensive jokes and he had posted some things that were sort of racially tinged and they certainly did not make him look good.
So he went back in all of his social media feed and he's deleting all these posts.
But you can't delete those posts and make them go away.
Oh yeah, you can delete them.
You know this and I do too.
Screenshots live forever.
The internet is forever.
And he's trying to delete all these things.
Eventually he got fired as the filmmaker for the Guardians of the Galaxy.
He basically got rehired for the third film.
But the truth is this, that he had that written record against him and it's not going away.
Now here's the problem.
We're dead in our sins.
There's this certificate of indebtedness against us.
and then the gospel shows up.
See, all of that's the bad news.
Here's the good news.
The good news is there is a win that grace provides.
You were dead in your wrongdoings and the uncircumcision of your flesh, but He made you alive together with Him.
Since Jesus is alive, you can be alive too.
He can make you alive in him.
Not only that, but with that certificate of indebtedness.
He took it away.
He canceled it.
He nailed it to the cross.
Jesus did not reduce our debt.
He didn't restructure a payment plan.
He removed it and he forgives our sins.
He cancels every charge against us.
As you walk into 2026, you can walk into 2026 in the freedom of forgiveness in the full cancellation of your sin debt before God.
When Jesus was giving his life on the cross because he gave his life on the cross.
No one took it from him.
Some of his last words were in John 1930.
It is finished.
It's three words in the English translation.
It's one in the Greek New Testament.
Te telestai.
That's the word.
It won't be on the test.
Don't worry about it.
Te telestai.
It means paid in full.
The indebtedness is canceled.
See, that's why Paul uses this illustration of a certificate of debt.
Because once you had paid the debt, you got a receipt that said it's paid in full.
Biola University, a Christian school in California, has a wonderful display.
And one of the things they have is a piece of papyrus from the first century.
This is from the time of Jesus, at least from the time of Paul.
This is so old.
And it basically says tax paid to Telli of 2% through the gate of Nisos by Neferos exporting to our bottles of dates on one donkey.
So if someone confronted Neferos and said, Hey, you haven't paid your taxes.
He just showed them that receipt.
Yes, it's paid.
in full.
Now here's the beautiful picture of the gospel.
The beautiful picture of the gospel is that someone else paid for you.
A few years ago, my mom and dad had come to visit and my dad and I both got up kind of early.
Everybody else was sleeping in.
He said, hey, let's go get breakfast together.
So my dad and I went and got breakfast.
We were sitting in a cafe and
We ate breakfast and we were talking about some things he wanted to talk to me about.
And the waitress came over after we'd been there for a little while and kind of a long while.
And, you know, we want some more coffee and we're like, no, we're kind of coffeeed out.
And I said, my dad said, actually, we need to check.
And she said, oh, that's been taken care of.
And I looked around immediately to see if some of you were there.
I mean, you're wonderful, generous people.
I'm like, somebody did this.
but my dad was just stunned.
Now, you guys occasionally, some of you will do that for me if you sketch us in a restaurant, and it's so kind of you.
But that had never happened to my dad before.
He was just stunned that somebody had bought his food that morning.
I mean, somebody he didn't even know had bought his food.
And we were talking about that.
And I said, hey dad, what we should do is ask her, did they take care of you?
And so we decided,
that we would leave a tip anyway because it didn't matter.
If someone had been generous to us, we were gonna be generous to the waitress, you know, so we just did that.
My dad talked about that for weeks that somebody he didn't even know paid the check.
When it comes to your sin, I just want you to understand this.
Grace paid the check.
Your entire sin, that record, that record of wrongdoing,
It's been canceled.
It's been taken away.
It was nailed to the cross spiritually.
And Jesus died for your sins and for mine.
You've been listening to a message from First Baptist Church, Wiginal Falls.
For more information about First Baptist, including gathering times and locations, click the link in the show notes or go to fbcwf.org.
We'll see you next week.